-*- Mode: Text -*-

POWERLOOM INSTALLATION GUIDE

Version: README,v 1.4 2003/10/29 20:03:51 hans Exp
This document describes PowerLoom 3.0 or later.

For more documentation on PowerLoom please see the PowerLoom manual available
from the PowerLoom Web site at http://www.isi.edu/isd/LOOM/PowerLoom/ or
included with the release in the directory `sources/logic/doc/'.


System Requirements
===================

   To install and use PowerLoom you'll approximately need the following
amounts of disk space:

   * 15 MB for the tar-red or zip-ped archive file

   * 60 MB for the untarred sources, tanslations, compiled Java files
     and documentation

   * 14 MB to compile a Lisp version

   * 15 MB to compile the C++ version (without -g)

   * 4 MB to compile the Java version (already included)

   This means that you will need approximately 90 MB to work with one
Lisp, one C++ and one Java version of PowerLoom in parallel.  If you
also want to experiment with the Lisp translation variant that uses
structures instead of CLOS instances to implement STELLA objects, then
you will need an extra 15 MB to compile that.

   The full PowerLoom development tree is quite large, since for every
STELLA source file there are three to four translated versions and as
many or more compiled versions thereof.  The actual PowerLoom libraries
that you have to ship with an application, however, are quite small.
For example, the Java jar file `powerloom.jar' is only 2.2 MB (4 MB
including Java sources).  The dynamic C++ libraries `libstella.so' and
`liblogic.so' compiled on a Linux platform are about 7 MB total.
Additionally, if you don't need all the different translations of
PowerLoom, you can delete some of the versions to keep your development
tree smaller (*Note Removing Unneeded Files::).

   To run the Lisp version of PowerLoom you need an ANSI Common-Lisp
(or at least one that supports CLOS and logical pathnames).  We have
successfully tested PowerLoom with Allegro-CL 4.2, 4.3, 5.0, 6.0 and
6.1, Macintosh CL 3.0 and 4.0, Lucid CL 4.1 (plus the necessary ANSI
extensions and Mark Kantrowitz's logical pathnames implementation) and
the freely available CMUCL 18e.  Our main development platform is
Allegro CL running under Sun Solaris and Linux RedHat, so, the closer
your environment is to ours, the higher are the chances that everything
will work right out of the box.  Lisp development under Windows is also
not a problem.

   To run the C++ version of PowerLoom you need a C++ compiler such as
g++ that supports templates and exception handling.  We have
successfully compiled and run PowerLoom with g++ 2.96 under Linux
Redhat 7.0 and 7.2, and with CygWin 5.0 under Windows 2000 (CygWin
provides a very Unix-like environment).  We have not yet tried to run
the C++ version fully natively under Windows.  The main portability
issue is the garbage collector.  It is supposed to be very portable and
run natively on Windows platforms, but we have never verified that.

   For the Java version you will need Java JDK 1.2 or later.  To get
reasonable performance, you should use JDK 1.3 or later.  We've run the
Java version of PowerLoom on a variety of platforms without any
problems.

   Any one of the Lisp, C++ or Java implementations of PowerLoom can be
used to develop your own PowerLoom-based applications.  Which one you
choose is primarily a matter of your application and programming
environment.  The Lisp and Java versions are comparable in speed, the
C++ version is usually a factor of 2-3 faster than Lisp or Java.


Unpacking the Sources
=====================

   Uncompress and untar the file `powerloom-X.Y.Z.tar.gz' (or unzip the
file `powerloom-X.Y.Z.zip') in the parent directory of where you want
to install PowerLoom (`X.Y.Z' are place holders for the actual version
numbers).  This will create the PowerLoom tree in the directory
`powerloom-X.Y.Z/' (we will use Unix syntax for pathnames).  All
pathnames mentioned below will be relative to that directory which we
will usually refer to as the "PowerLoom directory".


Lisp Installation
=================

   To install the Lisp version of PowerLoom startup Lisp and load the
file `load-powerloom.lisp' with:

     (CL:load "load-powerloom.lisp")

   The first time around this will compile all Lisp-translated STELLA
files before they are loaded.  During subsequent sessions the compiled
files will be loaded right away.

   If you want to use the version that uses Lisp structs instead of CLOS
objects to implement STELLA objects do the following:

     (CL:setq cl-user::*load-cl-struct-stella?* CL:t)
     (CL:load "load-powerloom.lisp")

   Alternatively, you can edit the initial value of the variable
`*load-cl-struct-stella?*' in the file `load-stella.lisp'.  Using
structs instead of CLOS objects greatly improves slot access speed,
however, it may cause problems with incremental re-definition of STELLA
classes (this is only an issue if you are developing your application
code in the STELLA language.  In that case it is recommended to only
use the struct option for systems that are in or near the production
stage).

   Once all the files are loaded, you should see a message similar to
this:

     PowerLoom 3.0.0 loaded.
     Type `(powerloom)' to get started.
     Type `(in-package "STELLA")' to run PowerLoom commands directly
        from the Lisp top level.
     USER(2):

   To reduce startup time, you might want to create a Lisp image that
has all of PowerLoom preloaded.

   Now type
     (in-package "STELLA")

   to enter the `STELLA' Lisp package where all the PowerLoom code
resides.  Alternatively, you can type

     (powerloom)

   which will bring up a PowerLoom listener that will allow you to
execute PowerLoom commands.

   *IMPORTANT*: All unqualified Lisp symbols in this document are
assumed to be in the `STELLA' Lisp package.  Moreover, the `STELLA'
package does *NOT* inherit anything from the `COMMON-LISP' package (see
the file `sources/stella/cl-lib/cl-setup.lisp' for the few exceptions),
hence, you have to explicitly qualify every Lisp symbol you want to use
with `CL:'.  For example, to get the result of the previous evaluation
you have to type `CL:*' instead of `*'.


C++ Installation
================

   To compile the C++ version of PowerLoom change to the native C++
directory and run `make':

     % cd native/cpp/logic
     % make

   This will compile all PowerLoom and STELLA files, the C++ garbage
collector and generate static or dynamic `libstella' and `liblogic'
library files in the directory `native/cpp/lib' which can later be
linked with your own C++-translated PowerLoom (or other) code.  To test
whether the compilation was successful you can run PowerLoom from the
top-level PowerLoom directory like this:

     % ./native/cpp/logic/logic
     Initializing STELLA...
     Initializing PowerLoom...
     
         Welcome to PowerLoom 3.0.0
     
     Copyright (C) USC Information Sciences Institute, 1997-2002.
     PowerLoom comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY!
     Type `(copyright)' for detailed copyright information.
     Type `(help)' for a list of available commands.
     Type `(demo)' for a list of example applications.
     Type `bye', `exit', `halt', `quit', or `stop', to exit.
     
     
     |=

   This will run various PowerLoom startup code and then bring up a
PowerLoom command loop where you can execute commands.  Type

     (demo)

   to bring up a menu of available demos, type

     (run-powerloom-tests)

   to run the PowerLoom test suite, or type

     exit

   to exit PowerLoom.


Java Installation
=================

   Nothing needs to be done to install the Java version.  Since Java
class files are platform independent, they are already shipped with the
PowerLoom distribution and can be found in the directory `native/java'
and its subdirectories.  Additionally, they have been collected into the
file `powerloom.jar' in the PowerLoom directory.  To try out the Java
version of PowerLoom run the following in the PowerLoom directory:

     % java -jar powerloom.jar
     Initializing STELLA...
     Initializing PowerLoom...
     
         Welcome to PowerLoom 3.0.0
     
     Copyright (C) USC Information Sciences Institute, 1997-2002.
     PowerLoom comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY!
     Type `(copyright)' for detailed copyright information.
     Type `(help)' for a list of available commands.
     Type `(demo)' for a list of example applications.
     Type `bye', `exit', `halt', `quit', or `stop', to exit.
     
     
     |=

   Similar to the C++ executable, this will run various PowerLoom
startup code and then bring up a PowerLoom command loop where you can
execute commands.  Type

     (demo)

   to bring up a menu of available demos, type

     (run-powerloom-tests)

   to run the PowerLoom test suite, or type

     exit

   to exit PowerLoom.


Removing Unneeded Files
=======================

   To save disk space you can remove files that you don't need.  For
example, if you are not interested in the C++ version of PowerLoom, you
can delete the directory `native/cpp'.  Similarly, you can remove
`native/java' to eliminate all Java-related files.  You could do the
same thing for the Lisp directory `native/lisp', but (in our opinion)
that would make it less convenient for you to develop new PowerLoom
code that is written in STELLA.  Finally, if you don't need any of the
STELLA sources, you can delete the directory `sources/stella'.  If you
don't need local copies of the STELLA and PowerLoom documentation, you
can delete parts or all of the directories `sources/stella/doc' and
`sources/logic/doc'.


Installing PowerLoom Patches
============================

   If you already have an older version of PowerLoom installed, you can
upgrade to the latest patch level by downloading incremental sets of
patches instead of downloading the complete release.  Patch files are
usually significantly smaller than the complete release and patching an
existing installation can also preserve local additions, deletions or
modifications.  PowerLoom patch files are available from the same
location as the full PowerLoom release.

   Patches are currently only available in Unix `diff' format which
requires the Unix `patch' utility to install them (the `patch' program
should be readily available on most Unix systems, otherwise, you can
get it for free from the Free Software Foundation).

   Patch files follow the following naming convention: Suppose the
current version of PowerLoom is 3.0.0, then the patch file to update to
the next patch level is called `powerloom-3.0.0-3.0.1.diff.gz'.

   *Important:* Patch files are strictly incremental, thus, to upgrade
from version 3.0.0 to 3.0.2 you will need two patch files, one to go to
version 3.0.1 and one to go from that to version 3.0.2 and you have to
apply them in that sequence.

   To find out the current version of your PowerLoom installation, look
at the version string displayed when the `powerloom' function is called
in Lisp, or when the C++ or Java program starts up.

   *Important:* Before you apply any patches you should always make a
backup copy of your current PowerLoom installation to preserve any
local modifications you made in case something goes wrong.

   To apply patches copy the appropriate patch file to the top level of
your PowerLoom installation directory.  Suppose the patch file is called
`powerloom-3.0.0-3.0.1.diff.gz'.  You can apply the patches using the
following command:

     gunzip -qc powerloom-3.0.0-3.0.1.diff.gz | patch -p1

   If you deleted some native PowerLoom files to save space you can use
the `-f' option to force `patch' to proceed even if files it needs to
patch do not exist anymore (this is somewhat dangerous in case `patch'
encounters some more serious problems).  For example:

     gunzip -qc powerloom-3.0.0-3.0.1.diff.gz | patch -p1 -f

   To keep patch files small, PowerLoom patch files do not contain
updated binary files that ship with the full release such as Java class
files, jar files and PDF documents.  Those have to be regenerated either
manually or with help of available Makefile's.  The Lisp version of
PowerLoom will automatically recompile the first time the updated system
is loaded.  To recompile the C++ installation follow the installation
instructions given above.  The Java version will need to be recompiled
manually (better patch recompilation support might become available in
the future).


Questions and Comments
======================

For questions or comments please send mail to the PowerLoom Forum mailing list
at <powerloom-forum@isi.edu>.  To be added to the mailing list either check
the appropriate boxes when you click through the PowerLoom license agreement
or send mail to <powerloom-forum-request@isi.edu>.
